Last summer I spent a few short hours at Riker's Island Correctional Facility
together with a small group of volunteers from Columbia University.  We were
there ostensibly to run an educational program. Wanting to move away from
traditional classroom arrangements, we conceived of our project, Rikers Bot,
as a digital storytelling event, combining elements of a programming workshop
and a writers group. The idea was to get folks excited about programming, to
give a measure of voice to those housed at Rikers under sometimes appalling
conditions, and to give the public at large a glimpse into an otherwise opaque
institution. Most importantly, we were there to spend a bit of time with the
young people of Rikers. It was an encounter with the penal system in the midst
of our community.

Even in the best of times, entering Rikers is not easy. One goes through a
series of gates and checkpoints. One laminated card is exchanged for another.
The guard stamps a mark on your wrist using invisible ink.

But the jail was also not what I expected. I thought that once inside, I would
observe the state of total surveillance. Conditioned by the Foucauldian image
of the panopticon I expected to see docile bodies, the control of activity,
hierarchical observation, the panopticon. Instead, we were all struck by the
dilapidated, almost abandoned feeling of the facility grounds. At one point, a
young guard, not in uniform yet, on the way to start her shift, ushered us in
quickly and probably without following protocol. She led us through rooms
filled with well-used riot gear, past guards eating breakfast, through
hallways lined with posters about job safety, potlucks, and charity football
games.

We were on the way to a wing of the building which housed the classrooms. But
at some point, while walking up a staircase, our guide ducked out into a side
door, which locked behind her. Perhaps she went to change into her uniform.
We waited in the staircase. We knew where we had to go, but the doors ahead of
us and behind were locked. Standing there quietly, together, we understood
something about the jail. Despite the guards and the cameras, it was not a
place of total surveillance. The building stood in isolation from the outside
world. Our presence here was registered by hand in a notebook. We traded our
state issued identification for a piece of paper and a stamp. We left no
digital trace. In short, no one really knew we were here.

A moment of silence in the stairwell punctuated the paradox at the center of
Bernard Harcourt's recent book, *Exposed: Desire and Disobedience in the
Digital Age*. Panopticons of incarceration from centuries past pail in
comparison with those that surround us today. Rather than acquiescing to
structures of command and surveillance by force, against our will, and in
confinement, we have surrendered to them voluntarily, without duress, and at
scale that reaches ubiquitously past prisons into open space. The condition of
willful exposure Harcourt describes in his book challenges well-worn tropes of
critical theory. Harcourt begins by noting that we inhabit nether Guy Dubord's
"society of spectacle" nor Michel Foucault's "punitive society." Rather, the
book documents the emergence of a "new architecture of power relations,"
"knots of state-like power," and "mini-theaters of consumption."

A new logic of watching and being watched brings with it novel companions: the
body double in the reflection of our devices, the quantified self, the ever
vigilant artificially intelligent personal assistant. Where some wear ankle
bracelets in punishment, others strap on wrist bracelets in the name of health
and self discovery. The momentary quiet of a stairway somewhere at Rikers,
stripped from the noise of cell phones and Twitter feeds, gave me a visceral
feeling of isolation. Rikers was scary not because it represented order, but
because compared to my usually compartmentalized and hyper-connected life it
gave room to violence and disorder. "It sounds like I'm in a zoo with all of
the birds chirping," wrote one of the young people. "Jail makes us feel
deprived and cause vagueness---lacking definite form or character," the bot
tweeted. "All the birds outside the windows make it so hard to hear anything."

The expository society, as Harcourt calls this emerging assemblage of
technology, practice, norms, and institutions, frustrates long-held intuitions
about spectacle and surveillance, inside and outside, public and private. We
live in an expository society, Bernard writes, in a society of willful
exposure and exhibition. In this perverse light, the inability to expose
oneself seems like punishment. And the reward for being watched---liked,
favorited, followed---is personal affirmation. Under the emerging regime there
is need for bars nor cells nor watchtowers. We enter into the hall of mirrors
willingly. We will demand entrance. And we reveal ourselves in return.

To make sense of the revealment, Harcourt suggests new metaphors that open new
critical possibilities. The state is now an oligarchic amalgam of the
intelligence community, retailers, Silicon Valley, military and corporate
interests, social media, politics, banking, and telecommunication. No longer a
big brother, it rather looks like an octopus from the US National
Reconnaissance Office, one of the country's seventeen intelligence agencies.
Instead of the panopticon we have the glass mirror pavilion. It does not just
observe: it gives glimpses, it reflects, distorts, and offers "pockets of
obscurity." Like the ivory tower, the panopticon represented remote power. It
is not clear who is in charge in the glass pavilion. It is a place to watch
and be watched; to play and to surveil. Instead of the uncanny and devious
body double impostor, Harcourt gives us the data double. The data double lives
in the statistics of criminal justice but also in social media and
in advertisement.

We have only began to understand the personal and political implications of
the expository society in which surveillance is both more total and more
voluntary that was every imagined. The nightmare of Orwell's 1984 is in some
ways less intrusive than the reality of 2016. Harcourt book ultimately points
to the desire at the root of our need for exposure. Total surveillance turns
out to be pretty fun. You get see the kind of weird shit you always suspected
people did in private. And you get to share your weirdness knowing that you
are not really alone. The desire at the center of the voluntary surveillance
conundrum leads to a truly staggering insight. Harcourt writes, and I am
there with him, about the not-too distant possibility of a future in which
there will be no need to incarcerate. "We will all be watched closely," he
writes. "We won't need to confine anyone, because we will be able to see
everywhere" and perhaps even "control behavior from a distance."

Reading Harcourt's work reminds me of the distance between the realms of tin
foil hat conspiracy and science fiction yesterday is the pleasant everyday
reality of today. A few technical

Rather than repeating its contents, I would like to offer
several technical footnotes on expository society not found in the book. I
submit two devices for your consideration. Both came on the market in 2015.
Both were introduced by some of the largest private entities implicated in
Harcourt's story: Google and Amazon.[^ln-samsung]

The first o

OnHub, "A new type of router for the new way to Wi-Fi," Remarkable
for its "innovative circular antenna design," which "provides reliable Wi-Fi
coverage in more directions in your home." A tear-down of the device by
engineers at IFIXIT revealed 13 antennas, along with an ambient light sensor
inside.

\- Amazon Echo. "Amazon Echo is designed around your voice. It's hands-free
and always on. Tucked under the light ring on Echo is an array of seven
microphones. These sensors use beam-forming technology to hear you from any
direction, even while music is playing. Echo is also an expertly tuned speaker
that can fill any room with immersive sound." "Echoâ€”is built in the cloud,"
the materials go on to say, "so it is always getting smarter. The more you use
Echo, the more it adapts to your speech patterns, vocabulary, and personal
preferences."

What is interesting to me about these gadgets is the central place they are
meant to occupy in the home. The router and the speaker were always ugly and
hidden devices. We put them on top of shelves or under our desks. The Echo and
the OnHub router differ from similar devices in that they are both round: they
are towers. Both companies encourage customers to place them centrally in the
home.

I submit two further pieces of evidence for your consideration.

\- In 2014 researchers from UC Berkley published a paper. "SoundLoc is a
room-level localization system that exploits the intrinsic acoustic properties
of individual rooms and obviates the needs for infrastructures. The main
contributions of our work are the following. First, a cost-effective RIR (Room
Impulse Response) measurement system is implemented and the Noise Adaptive
Extraction of Reverberation (NAER) algorithm is developed to estimate room
acoustic parameters in noisy conditions. Second, a comprehensive physical and
statistical analysis of features extracted from RIRs is performed. Also,
SoundLoc is evaluated using the dataset consisting of ten (10) different
rooms. The overall accuracy of 97.8% achieved demonstrates the potential to be
integrated into automatic mapping of building space."

\- In a paper published in the Association for Computing Machinery's Special
Interest Group on Data Communications 2013 proceedings, Fadel Adib and Dina
Katabi from MIT introduce something they call Wi-Vi. "Wi-Vi is a new
technology that enables seeing through walls using Wi-Fi signals. It allows us
to track moving humans through walls and behind closed doors. Wi-Vi relies on
capturing the reflections of its own transmitted signals off moving objects
behind a wall in order to track them. Wi-Vi's operation does not require
access to any device on the other side of the wall."

Just a few years ago, the suggestion that such devices would be in use for
surveillance, in the strange collusion between public and private instruments
and bureaucracies of exposition, would be relegated to the paranoid fringe of
the critical conversation. Today, the evidence is impossible to dismiss. The
state of affairs that Bernard carefully describes in the middle portions of
the book builds an overwhelming case for the emergence of the expository
society, which reconfigures the very notions of self and state.

I have no evidence that the purpose of these new breed of gadgets, meant to
occupy a central space in our living rooms, is indeed to map out our homes or
or to trace our conversations. I want to merely note that it is technically
and legally possible. I therefore remain keenly interested in the literal
deconstruction of such devices. I want to get to know them, just as much as
they want to get to know me. Bernard's books gives us a language to unfold
something like the tehchno-semiotics of expository power. (I mean the thing is
not subtle, it is called Echo). Bernard encourages us to turn the camera
around and to return the gaze, making transparent the room on the other side
of the one-way mirror.

These small remark bring us to the conclusion of the volume. Dissent Bernard
suggests is possible, but how? There are some ideas in the occluding chapters,
but I think the book is meant as a provocation to our community. The book asks us to rise to
the challenge of technology.

I see at least three ways forward. Allow me to suggest them quickly.

\- The war. My family moved to this country in 1991, at the end of the Cold
War. Since then, the United States has found new enemies. And the country
entered a state of perpetual war. Much of what Bernard describes in his book,
is done in the name of extraordinary measures during wartime. Extraordinary
measures are a favorite tools of tyrannies. Yet the anti-war rhetoric that
defined generations of left-wing activists has receded into the background.
Violence is perhaps more palatable now because it is hidden and dehumanized.
The first way forward then is to renew our commitment to demilitarization.

\- Second, the dissolution of the Soviet Union heralded the decline of an
ideology: namely statist socialsm and centrally-planned economy. Yet, we have
yet to deal intellectually with the centralizing forces of capitalist
economies. Monopoly has long been a staple of neo-liberalism. Entities like
Google, Amazon, Uber, and AirBnB exert immense centralizing pressures on the
marketplace, including the marketplace of ideas. From the engineering systems
perspective, the alternative to such central structures is distribution. For
this reason we see the emergence of distributed technologies like Diaspora
(mentioned in the book), bit-torrent, bit-coin, Library Genesis, and
Wikipedia. These are marked by an attempt to decentralize infrastructure. In
parallel, we witness a resurgent interest in the earlier, abortive branch of
anti-statist communism. Figures like Bakunin, Kropotkin, and Bookchin figure
prominently in the conversation about technological resistance.

\- Finally, Bernard's book makes it impossible not feel complicit in the
system by which thousands of thousands of voluntary daily micro transactions,
which in aggregate bring the expository society into existence. As a community
that values intellectual independence, we must begin to align the sharp edge
of critical theory with our practice. This includes the way we read, write,
find, and share information online. For people who spend so much time in front
of our computers in search for knowledge, we are remarkable alienated from the
material contexts of knowledge production. *Exposed* reminds us of an
uncomfortable truth and I am excited to continue the conversation about
possible solutions.

[^ln-samsung]: Samsung Smart TV, the world's largest manufacturer of
televisions. "Please be aware that if your spoken words include personal or
other sensitive information, that information will be among the data captured
and transmitted to a third party through your use of Voice Recognition,"
Samsung said in its terms and conditions policy."

## Notes

"Cure and hollow out the individual"
"mortification of self, ceding privacy"
"Turn the camera around"
